Misconception Dataset
Author: Nancy Otero
Date: July 2023


Educators and researchers have spent decades studying learners’ ideas, errors, and misconceptions, but the use of that knowledge has not yet permeated the classroom. Discovering learners’ conceptions and misconceptions can be a daunting activity for teachers that requires years of experience. 
LLMs can potentially bridge math misconception’s research with teachers’ practices and learners' activities. This document presents an algebra misconception dataset that is built to be used by LLMs and has been tested on GPT4.  

When tested, GPT4 was able to correctly label with the proper misconception 65% of the incorrect students' answers using .2 temperature. 

Possible applications to the EdTech ecosystem include:

Design of multiple choice distractors that can locate learners’ misconceptions
Creation of hints and feedback for learners
Training of teachers in diagnosing misconceptions
Generation of synthetic data that can served as simulated students
Dataset
The dataset includes per misconception:
Meta Data
ID
Misconception description
Topic. One of seven prerequisite content areas in which students must demonstrate understanding prior to a formal algebra course (Bush & Karp, 2001). 
Number sense
Number operations
Ratios and proportional thinking
Properties of number and operations 
Patterns, relationships and functions
Algebraic representations 
Variables, expressions and operations 
Equations and inequalities. 

Research Based Examples

Four research based examples including
A question
An incorrect answer demonstrating the misconception
The correct answer (in some cases)

When a graph is part of the question or answer the examples include:
An example without a description of the graph 
An example with a description of the graph made by me

See Fig 1


A graph in wolfram alpha that matches the graph in the question or answer made by me (in progress)

See Fig 2

The link for a picture from the paper

See Fig 3

Papers’ reference link per example

Depending on the paper some examples: 

Include more than one response as described by researcher:

See Fig 4

Include learners process as described by researcher

See Fig 5

Test Cases

To test how much would a model such as GPT4 can use the research 

One correct question/answer 
One random question/answer 
Two real student question/answer with the misconception from either papers or the internet

See Fig 6

GPT4 Testing

GPT4 was tested on identifying the misconception ID given a random mix of test cases, random response and correct response. The prompt included all the misconceptions of that “Topic” with their ID, description and four examples. The test was designed this way because not all misconceptions could be included in the prompt given the token restriction in their API. 

After several iterations the best prompt was:

    I’ll give you a spreadsheet with a list of MaEs. Each MaEs has an ID, an explanation of the MaE, and 4 examples of the MaE. Then I’ll show you {len(tests_df)} answers. I want you to tell me how many of the {{num_maes}} MaEs you can identify in the answers, identify as many as you can. Please process each of the answers and tell me per each one:
     If the answer is correct
     If the answer is not correct: how many MaEs can you identify? Which ones and why?
     Delimited your analysis of each answer with the prefix Answer $N, where $N indicates which answer it is referring to.
     Spreadsheet:
     {examples_string}
     Answers to identify:
     {tests_string}
    
    {len(tests_df)} Number of elements in a random mix that includes: correct responses, real data, and random answer
    {{num_maes}} Number of misconceptions
    {examples_string} Misconception description, ID, Topic and four examples
    {tests_string} A mix of correct responses, real data, and random answer

The best results were achieved with temperature .2, correctly identifying the unique ID of 65% of the cases. ~87% of GPT4 misidentified IDs were due to identifying another similar misconception. The rest, ~13% were due to GPT4 incorrect math reasoning. 

Example of multiple match responses:

See Fig 7

Example of incorrect math reasoning:

See Fig 8

Examples of Results of Test 1 with .2 temperature real data (excluding correct and random responses)
False is when GPT4 failed to identify the correct ID
True is when GPT4 correctly identify the correct ID

See Fig 9

Examples of Results of Test 2 with .2 temperature real data (excluding correct and random responses)
False is when GPT4 failed to identify the correct ID
True is when GPT4 correctly identify the correct ID

See Fig 10

Most Common Interchanged IDs:

See Table 1

References

Bush, S. B., & Karp, K. S. (2013). Prerequisite algebra skills and associated misconceptions of middle grade students: A review. The Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 32(3), 613-632.
